README.md, before:

# RNA-Seq analysis on sapelo2 at UGA

Tsai lab RNA-Seq script

## demo using Eucalyptus data: instructions on sapelo2

1. clone this repo

```bash
git clone https://github.com/TsailabBioinformatics/RNA-Seq.git;cp RNA-Seq/* .
```

2. change the email address to yours for notification at the header in the `demo.sh` and `array_mapping_script.sh`

3. submit the `demo.sh` to the cluster

```bash
sbatch demo.sh
```

### explanation of the demo.sh:

1. copy the genome fasta and annotatino gff3 file to the current folder

```bash
cp /work/cjtlab/Database/Egrandis/v2.0/annotation/Egrandis_297_v2.0.gene_exons.gff3 .
cp /work/cjtlab/Database/Egrandis/v2.0/assembly/Egrandis_297_v2.0.fa ./genome.fa

```

2. transfer the gff3 to `genome.gtf`, when processing your own data, this step can be done using interactive mode after `qlogin`

```bash
module load gffread
gffread Egrandis_297_v2.0.gene_exons.gff3 -T -o gene.gtf 
```

<!-- hays: i think at this point, we could possibly reorganize our directory structure -->

3. prepare the index for the genome with STAR, this step require larger memory, 17.66 GB for Egrandis in this demo, so it can not be done in interactive mode

```bash
ml STAR
STAR \
--runThreadN 8 \
--runMode genomeGenerate \
--genomeSAindexNbases 13 \
--genomeDir . \
--genomeFastaFiles genome.fa \
--sjdbGTFfile gene.gtf
```

<!-- hays: here my program was killed. we could possibly offer debugging support -->

4. copy the fastq file to the data folder

```bash
cp /work/cjtlab/testing_data/eugra.tar.gz .
tar xvfz eugra.tar.gz
cp -r ./eugra/* .
```

5. submit the array_mapping_script.sh to the cluster, the script will process raw reads trimming and mapping to the genome

```bash
sbatch array_mapping_script.sh
```

## make it work for your own data (WIP, haven't tested yet)

1. change the file.list (see instruciton from [Ran's note](https://www.evernote.com/shard/s202/client/snv?noteGuid=070f6281-ef94-47c1-a4df-3dbb2083693c&noteKey=2e87d16e54db6d4b&sn=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.evernote.com%2Fshard%2Fs202%2Fsh%2F070f6281-ef94-47c1-a4df-3dbb2083693c%2F2e87d16e54db6d4b&title=RNAseq%2Bpipeline%2B%2528SLURM%2Bsystem%2B2020%2529))

2. copy your own fastq file to the `./fastq` folder, check the file format, it should be `*.R{1,2}.fastq`

3. copy your own `genome.fasta` and `gene.gtf` to the data folder

4. In `array_mapping_script.sh` change the array number: `#SBATCH --array=1-n`, `n` = number of lines in `file.list`

## TODO (WIP, not in the order of priority)

1. scale up for different species

2. make the script not restricted to `genome.fa` and `genome.gtf` this specific file name

3. turn the overall script into real pipeline using `Common Workflow Language (CWL)` or `Workflow Description Language (WDL)`

4. package stuff into container

5. automatic adjust the number of array requested

6. get rid of the unnecessary zipping and intermediate files removing commands

7. input autodetection: auto detect the paired reads (allow wildcard usage in input file name) and take all kind of input fastq files (.fq.gz, .fastq.gz, .fq, .fastq......)

8. investigate the effect of rRNA mapping

Commit message:

update readme about objectives in the description section

README.md, after:

# RNA-Seq analysis on sapelo2 at UGA

Tsai lab RNA-Seq script

## Description

Prepare a sample table with the schema like `rnaseq_pollen_sample_table.csv`, this script will then run the RNA-Seq pipeline on the samples from different species in the table.

![workflow](images/workflow.png)

It will create folder structure like:

```
{species_id}
    fastq (raw fastq files)
    reference (genome reference from Phytozome or other sources)
        species_genome.fasta -> genome.fa
        species_annotation.gff3 -> gene.gtf
    clean (filtered reads)
    mapping (alignment maps)
    count (quantification results for further analysis)
    misc (other intermediate files)
        *.txt
        log....
```

## in-house resources

the pollen fastq files’ path: `strawberry:~/ChenHsieh/pollen_rnaseq`

the complete Phytozome zipped file: `/home/tsailab1/chenhsieh/pep/Phytozome_download.zip`


## Demo of single species pipeline using Eucalyptus data: instructions on sapelo2

1. clone this repo

```bash
git clone https://github.com/TsailabBioinformatics/RNA-Seq.git;cp RNA-Seq/* .
```

2. change the email address to yours for notification at the header in the `demo.sh` and `array_mapping_script.sh`

3. submit the `demo.sh` to the cluster

```bash
sbatch demo.sh
```

### explanation of the demo.sh:

1. copy the genome fasta and annotatino gff3 file to the current folder

```bash
cp /work/cjtlab/Database/Egrandis/v2.0/annotation/Egrandis_297_v2.0.gene_exons.gff3 .
cp /work/cjtlab/Database/Egrandis/v2.0/assembly/Egrandis_297_v2.0.fa ./genome.fa

```

2. transfer the gff3 to `genome.gtf`, when processing your own data, this step can be done using interactive mode after `qlogin`

```bash
module load gffread
gffread Egrandis_297_v2.0.gene_exons.gff3 -T -o gene.gtf 
```

<!-- hays: i think at this point, we could possibly reorganize our directory structure -->

3. prepare the index for the genome with STAR, this step require larger memory, 17.66 GB for Egrandis in this demo, so it can not be done in interactive mode

```bash
ml STAR
STAR \
--runThreadN 8 \
--runMode genomeGenerate \
--genomeSAindexNbases 13 \
--genomeDir . \
--genomeFastaFiles genome.fa \
--sjdbGTFfile gene.gtf
```

<!-- hays: here my program was killed. we could possibly offer debugging support -->

4. copy the fastq file to the data folder

```bash
cp /work/cjtlab/testing_data/eugra.tar.gz .
tar xvfz eugra.tar.gz
cp -r ./eugra/* .
```

5. submit the array_mapping_script.sh to the cluster, the script will process raw reads trimming and mapping to the genome

```bash
sbatch array_mapping_script.sh
```

## make it work for your own data (WIP, haven't tested yet)

1. change the file.list (see instruciton from [Ran's note](https://www.evernote.com/shard/s202/client/snv?noteGuid=070f6281-ef94-47c1-a4df-3dbb2083693c&noteKey=2e87d16e54db6d4b&sn=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.evernote.com%2Fshard%2Fs202%2Fsh%2F070f6281-ef94-47c1-a4df-3dbb2083693c%2F2e87d16e54db6d4b&title=RNAseq%2Bpipeline%2B%2528SLURM%2Bsystem%2B2020%2529))

2. copy your own fastq file to the `./fastq` folder, check the file format, it should be `*.R{1,2}.fastq`

3. copy your own `genome.fasta` and `gene.gtf` to the data folder

4. In `array_mapping_script.sh` change the array number: `#SBATCH --array=1-n`, `n` = number of lines in `file.list`

## TODO (WIP, not in the order of priority)

1. scale up for different species

2. make the script not restricted to `genome.fa` and `genome.gtf` this specific file name

3. turn the overall script into real pipeline using `Common Workflow Language (CWL)` or `Workflow Description Language (WDL)`

4. package stuff into container

5. automatic adjust the number of array requested

6. get rid of the unnecessary zipping and intermediate files removing commands

7. input autodetection: auto detect the paired reads (allow wildcard usage in input file name) and take all kind of input fastq files (.fq.gz, .fastq.gz, .fq, .fastq......)

8. investigate the effect of rRNA mapping
